===========
Etiquettes
===========

* Structure the code properly
* Maintain good and consistent naming convention
* Keep it Simple
* Don’t repeat yourself


Git etiquette
=============

**Code formatting**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

BALSAMIC is using Black as code formatter: https://github.com/psf/black

**Conventional commits and PRs**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

PRs should follow the following keywords in the title: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/

Commit messages are recommended to following the following similar to PRs:

#. **feat**: Introducing a new features. This includes but not limited to workflows, SnakeMake rule, cli, and plugins. In other words, anything that is new and fundamental change will also go here. Enhancements and optimizations will go into refactor.
#. **fix**: This is essentially a patch. Included but not limited to: bug fixes, hotfixes, and any patch to address a known issue.
#. **doc**: Any changes to the documentation are part of doc subject line, included but not limited to docstrings, cli-help, readme, tutorial, documentation, CHANGELOG, and addition of ipython/jupyter notebook in the form of tutorial.
#. **test**: Any changes to the tests are part of test subject line. This includes adding, removing or updating of the following: unittests, validation/verification dataset, and test related configs.
#. **refactor**: Refactoring refers to a rather broad term. Any style changes, code enhancement, and analysis optimization.
#. **version**: Any changes to .bumpversion config and or change of version will be specified with this. This includes comments within .bumpversion, structure of .bumpversion, etc.

**Scope**
^^^^^^^^^

Scope is specified within parenthesis. It show the *scope* of the subject line. The following scope are valid:

* cli
* style
* rule (refers to SnakeMake rules)
* workflow (refer to SnakeMake workflows)
* config (refers to configs that are either used or generated by BALSAMIC)
* Relevant scopes that might fit into a scope description

Note: If scope is broad or matching with multiple (it shouldn't, but if it does) one can leave out the scope.

**Message**
^^^^^^^^^^^

It's better to start Git commit message with the following words:

* added
* removed
* updated



Snakemake etiquette
===================

The bioinformatics core analysis in BALSAMIC is defined by set of rules written as a Snakemake rules (``*.rule``) and Snakemake
workflow as (``*.smk``). Main ``balsamic.smk`` workflow uses these rules to create sets of output files from sets of input files.
Using ``{wildcards}`` Snakemake can automatically determine the dependencies between the rules by matching file names. The 
following guidelines describe the general conventions for naming and order of the rules, while writing a Snakemake file in
BALSAMIC. For further description of how Snakemake works, please refer to Snakemake official documentation: https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/


**Structure of Snakemake rules**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    rule <program>_<function>_<optional_tag>_<optional_tag>: 
        input:
            <named_input_1> = ...,
            <named_input_2> = ...,
        output:
            <named_output_1> = ...,
        benchmark:
            Path(benchmark_dir, "<rule_name>_<{sample}/{case_name}>.tsv").as_posix()
        singularity:
            singularity_image
        params:
            <named_param_1> = ...,
            <named_param_1> = ...,
        threads:
            get_threads(cluster_config, '<rule_name>')
        message:
            ("Align fastq files with bwa-mem to reference genome and sort using samtools for sample: {sample}"
            "<second line is allowed to cover more description>")
        shell:
             """
        <first_command> <options>;
        
        <second_command> <options>;

        <a_long_command> <--option-1> <value_1> \
        <--option-2> <value_2> \
        <--option-3> <value_3>;
            """

**Descriptions**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**rulename**: Rule name briefly should outline the program and functions utilized inside the rule. Each word is seperated by a underscore ``_``. First word is the bioinformatic tool or script's name. The following words describe subcommand within that bioinformatic tool and then followed by workflow specific description. The word length shouldn't exceed more than 3 or 4 words. Make sure rule names are updated within ``config/cluster.json`` and it is all lowercase. Examples: ``picard_collecthsmetrics_umi``, ``bcftools_query_calculateaftable_umi``

**input**: It is strongly recommended to set input and output files as named. Refrain from introducing new wildcards as much as possible.

**output**: This should follow the same instructions as ``input``.

**benchmark**: Benchmark name is prefixed with rule name and suffixed with '.tsv' file extension.

**singularity**: Make sure the singularity image does contain a Conda environment with required bioinformatics tools. Do not use this field if ``run`` is used instead of ``shell``.

**params**: If the defined parameter is a threshold or globally used constant; add it to ``utils/constants.py``. Respective class models need to be updated in ``utils/models.py``. 

**threads**: Make sure for each rule, the correct number of threads are assigned in ``config/cluster.json``. Otherwise it will be assigned default values from ``config/cluster.json`` . If there is no need for multithreading, this field can be removed from rule.

**message**: A short message describing the function of rule. Add any relevant wildcard to message to make it readable and understandable. It is also recommended to use ``params`` to build a more descriptive ``message``

**shell (run)**: Code inside the `shell/run` command should be left indented. Shell lines no longer than 100 characters. Break the long commands with ``\`` and followed by a new line. Avoid having long Python code within ``run``, instead add it to ``utils/`` as a Python script and import the function.

Example:

::

    java -jar \
    -Djava.io.tmpdir=${{tmpdir}} \
    -Xms8G -Xmx16G \
    $CONDA_PREFIX/share/picard.jar \
    MarkDuplicates \
    {input.named_input_1} \
    {output.named_output_1};


Example for external python scripts that can be saved as modules in ``utils/*.py`` and can use them as definitions in rules as:

:: 

    from BALSAMIC.utils.workflowscripts import get_densityplot
    get_densityplot(input.named_input1, params.named_params_1, output.named_output1 )

Similarly ``awk`` or ``R`` external scripts can be saved in ``assets/scripts/*awk`` and can be invoked using `get_script_path` as: 

::
  
    params: 
        consensusfilter_script = get_script_path("FilterDuplexUMIconsensus.awk")
    shell:
         """
    samtools view -h {input} | \
    awk -v MinR={params.minreads} \
    -v OFS=\'\\t\' -f {params.consensusfilter_script} | \
    samtools view -bh - > {output}
         """

**References**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/rules.html
2. https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/writing_snakefiles.html



Container etiquette
===================

BALSAMIC uses singularity containers to perform the bioinformatics analysis. These containers are built using Docker and pushed to Docker Hub.
For more details on building containers using docker, please refer to the official docker documentation: https://docs.docker.com/

**Structure of Docker recipe**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

::

    FROM <CONTAINER>:<VERSION>

    LABEL base.image="<CONTAINER>:<VERSION>"
    LABEL maintainer="Clinical Genomics"
    LABEL about.contact="support@clinicalgenomics.se"
    LABEL software="<NAME_OF_THE_MAIN_SOFTWARE>"
    LABEL software.version="<VERSION_OF_THE_MAIN_SOFTWARE>"
    LABEL about.summary="<DESCRIPTION_OF_THE_MAIN_SOFTWARE>"
    LABEL about.home="<URL_OF_THE_MAIN_SOFTWARE>""
    LABEL about.documentation="<DOCS_URL_OF_THE_MAIN_SOFTWARE>"
    LABEL about.license="MIT License (MIT)"

    RUN apt-get update && apt-get -y upgrade && \
        apt-get -y install --no-install-recommends && \
        <SOFTWARE_1 SOFTWARE_2> && \
        apt-get clean && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/* /tmp/* /var/tmp/*

    RUN ....

    USER    ubuntu
    WORKDIR /home/ubuntu
    CMD ["/bin/bash"]


It is preferable to:
    * Use official image as the base
    * Use Ubuntu-LTS as the base image
    * Avoid Conda unless necessary
    * Add versions
    * Avoid building containers with multiple software used in the rules